# Is possible measure the progrees in a correct way?

If our level of development results in a binding to a high ecological requirement, and this development is unequal across regions and countries, then it can be affirmed that the economic-ecological development model is unequal. In addition, having been able to analyze the ecological deficit and biocapacity, it is observed that there is no relationship between these variables and the level of development, therefore, the high level of development of many countries depends on the ecological requirement level of countries that compensate for this requirement with the biocapacity of others. Using a concrete example, taking into account the biocapacity and requirement of a country like Luxembourg, it is necessary for the requirements of other countries, and therefore their human development index, to compensate for this excess. In this way, it could be affirmed that many countries do not consume resources from their territory, but from other territories that are intended to live in low levels of development, since in order to increase their human development index they will have to increase their requirement, and it is plausible that the system cannot cope with these levels in a generalized manner. Therefore, it seems that the development model should be changed, or made more respectful, or the most efficient option.

On the other hand, it could be suggested that the global economic model does not take into account all the variables that should be synonymous with development. The fact that GDP has a certain relationship with the human development index and the ecological footprint, and being a high value of this in turn synonymous with development, indicates that all the variables that should be synonymous with development are not being taken into account or making a realistic measurement of what variables should be synonymous with development. Since the requirement (infinite) contrasts with the biocapacity (finite), which in terms of conceptual difference are indicative that the planet is acquiring a debt that can only be controlled when all the variables that influence development are truly taken into account, which we could call, real development. In this real development, a series of variables that are not taken into account would have to be taken into account, including ecological ones, thus avoiding the correlation of the HDI with it. In this line, other development indicators have appeared, far from the traditional GDP, such as the Genuine Progress Index, which does take into account, among many other things, the ecological variables of requirement.


